stop Gaza
genocide Global outrage over the war on
Gaza is growing the massacres and
Devastation are putting countries Under
Pressure to act against Israel some have
already announced they're breaking off
diplomatic relations so will this
pressure the US and Israel's other
Western allies to reconsider their
support for the war this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello there welcome to the program I'm
Nick Clark so Israel's bombardment of
Gaza is now into its second month more
than 10,000 Palestinians have been
killed huge sways of the strip have been
reduced to Rubble as public anger grows
around the world over what some
according a genocide Israel is facing
something of a diplomatic backlash South
Africa and Bolivia have severed
relations with Tel Aviv other countries
recalling their ambassadors and Embassy
staff this is seriously setting back
Israel's efforts in recent years to
establish relations with many nations
that boycotted it for decades so can
these diplomatic moves pressure the US
and Israel's other Western allies to
push it to at least agree to a
humanitarian ceasefire we'll be
discussing this and more with our guest
shortly but first this report from Sarah
Gil
for one month Gaza has been under
unrelenting
attack continuous air strikes have left
a catastrophic trail of
Destruction every basic service is
either not functioning or
overwhelmed hospitals schools mosques
churches grocery stores and bakeries
have been reduced to Rubble more than
10,000 people have been killed in some
of his sharpest remarks yet the head of
the United Nations has called again for
a ceasefire and help for those under
[Music]
attack the parties to the conflict and
indeed the International Community face
an immediate and fundamental
responsibility to stop the inhuman
Collective suffering and dramatically
expand humanitarian Aid to Gaza Israel
is facing pressure to stop the strikes
not only from the highest ranks at the
UN but also from Nations around the
world several countries have withdrawn
their ambassadors from
Israel Bolivia was the first country to
stise South Africa is the latest we
believe the nature uh of response by
Israel has become uh one of collective
punishment which Falls fully outside of
the practice of international
humanitarian and international human
rights law as well as growing diplomatic
isolation protests against Israel's war
on Gaza are being held around the world
from
Jakarta to Washington
DC some countries have even seen their
largest demonstrations
ever Israel's staunchest Western allies
including the US are coming under
increas ining pressure to reevaluate
their position on the war so can the
Biden Administration persuade Israel to
at least agree to a humanitarian Ceasar
Sara Gil fit inside
story well since the fighting began in
Gaza nine countries have recalled their
ambassadors or have cut off diplomatic
relations with Israel NATO member turkey
has withdrawn its Ambassador so has
Israel's neighbor Jordan that says the
country is committing war crimes South
Africa is the latest to join the list
and Bolivia was the first to completely
seati with Israel it said its decision
was a condemnation of the aggressive and
disproportionate Israeli military
offensive taking place in
Gaza so let's bring in our guest today
we are stacked with diplomatic and
political expertise in Islamabad we have
Mala Loi who's a former Pakistani
ambassador to the United Kingdom to the
United States and to the United Nations
in Aman jaad anani who's a former deputy
prime minister and foreign minister in
Jordan and in ptor aali boa mun a
professor of African politics at the
University of South Africa a warm
welcome to each of you uh ja danani I'd
like to start with you let's cut to the
chase as a former foreign minister you
know well very well the machinations of
diplomacy so before we get to the
nitty-gritty of Jordan's position
generally how serious do you think the
all these diplomatic withdrawals are for
Israel should Israel will Israel heed
them as a warning will it make any
difference as to how they proceed do you
think well I'm sure they are a little
bit concerned about them but probably
they will not dissuade this current
government from continuing with the same
uh with the same genocide that it is now
practicing uh so far we just heard from
netan that he is going to take care of
the security in Gaza for an indefinite
period of time this is uh just a polite
word not polite but another word for for
OCC occupation and so therefore instead
of uh allowing the Palestinians the
freedom to have their own State he is
now controlling more more more restoring
the occupation to Gaza which the
Israelis Rel
under ex prime minister Shon so in a way
uh this is not going anywhere so far and
there is not and the demands and the and
the United States and judging from the
statements which have been made by Mr
blankin state Secretary of State are not
encouraging at all uh we hear of course
some changes some tones in Europe but
that is not echoing yet and not
resonating with Israel government okay
Mali you're former Pakistani ambassador
to the UK and the United States and to
the UN again you know very well how this
all works but do you sense a growing
sense of Discord in the global Community
do you think we will see more ties being
CT I think what we are witnessing right
now is that the tide of global opinion
has moved decisively against Israel and
in solidarity with the Palestinians I
think there are several indicators of
this uh one I we know that a majority of
countries in fact almost two-thirds
voted for a ceasefire in the UN General
Assembly uh so you can see that the US
and Israel who opposed the resolution um
you know they were defeated second uh as
you mentioned more and more countries
are severing uh their ties with Israel
or recalling their ambassadors three I
think another indicator is that the pro
Palestinian protests across the world
are just growing in intensity and there
there is a momentum uh to them which is
really quite unprecedented and the
fourth indicator I would say of uh this
change in the tide of uh Global opinion
is that we have seen very strong
statements from the 18 heads of un
agencies and NOS that have called for a
ceasefire and have expressed shock and
horror at what Israel is doing so we are
looking at a changing Dynamic here uh
all of this pressure I think is
necessary but still not sufficient to
dissuade the United States from its
blind support of Israel right so M I was
just about to come to that because it's
all very well talking about this change
in Dynamic and this tide of global
opinion but while Israel has the US
support Mala it doesn't make any
difference it can just proceed as it
wishes
well it seems that the only country that
Israel will respond to is the United
States but I think the fact that
secretary blinken has been shuttling
between various Middle Eastern countries
shows that there is increasing worry uh
in the Biden Administration also I think
if you look at what's happening at the
UN Security Council after three failed
attempts to get a resolution through
which would be binding uh there is a
fourth attempt as I speak now whether
the deadlock in the security Council can
be broken or not we have to wait and see
so far the gridlock is there uh but the
US is coming under increasing pressure
and as I said before this pressure
diplomatic pressure is necessary but
still not sufficient all right we'll
explore the the situation the UN and the
UN Security Council in particular
shortly but let's get the view from
South Africa now from ptor Cali B uh
South Africa of course a big big
International player and such a decision
will not have come likely uh to withdraw
the Ambassador tell us about the
considerations that the top brass in
South Africa would have been taken into
account as they made this
decision there are quite a number of
aspects or factors that led to South
Africa's view of
withdrawing uh firstly it is the
question of increasing public protest
which we have seen recently ever since
the uh attacks on Israel by by Hamas and
of course the the subsequent um attacks
by the Israeli military on Gaza and
civilians and so on so that is the main
thing that in my view has uh led us to
this decision whereby South Africa
eventually felt that they need to pull
out but we mustn't forget that South
Africa during the aparted era many
freedom fighters from the African
National Congress from the Pana
africanist Congress and other Liberation
movements were supported by the
Palestinians and to that extent South
Africa feels a very very strong sense of
solidarity with the Palestinians
especially black South Africans we are
not discounting the fact that there is
also a sizable Jewish population here we
should obviously you know aside with
with with Israel and the most important
thing is that in the Diplomatic sphere
withdrawing an ambassador or even
cutting diplomatic ties sends a very
very serious message a strong message
and I think this is what the South
Africans are doing also not just for
South Africa but in line with many
African countries because the African
Union has also taken a similar strong
position with the statement that they
Rel released recently condemning
Israel's attacks on Gaza do do you think
that other African nations will follow
suit
now do I think so African the African
nations are what sorry can you repeat do
you think other African nations will
follow suit
now absolutely I think other African
nations will follow suit currently it
must be said it would appear that the
Africans are divided African countries
are divided what with countries like
Zambia countries like Kenya like Ghana
and Congo Republic seemingly supporting
Israel but we must not forget that a
divisive War such as this one is quite
likely also to invoke what I I would
call real politic in other words those
countries looking at their own economic
and security interest because Israel has
been supporting them in one way or the
other in terms of you know dealing with
drought relief and so on so quite likely
we are quite likely to see those States
apparently you know siding with Israel
but the majority in my view and the
moral Viewpoint seems to rest with the
Palestinians because as the secet
Secretary General Gutierrez said this
issue is about occupation and in my view
I also want to stress that we must not
forget that we keep talking about the
attack of Israel on Gaza or the attacks
of Hamas on on Israel we forget that
actually this is the issue around the
rise of Palestinians to self
determination which seems to be falling
off the radar or of the international
Global agenda
repeatedly jard so Jordan has acted
decisively but few other Arab Nations
have been quite so bold H and it seems
that many people on the street are
calling for them to do so do you think
there may yet be more support and
decisive action and and sing of ties
from from the Arab
world well thank you I believe that they
should uh this is the time that they
should because there is no way uh for
the Arab masses which are really
protesting and expecting more from their
leaders to accept the current status
status as as is seeing the Bloodshed and
the devastation and the mayhe which
Israel is inflicting on the people of
Gaza uh and also in the West Bank and if
they let this uh continue in Gaza then
it will probably be transferred to the
West Bank as well and we will see
continuation of this ugliness uh I think
what we need to see from the Arab
leaders who are going to meet on for a
summit meeting on the on the 11th of
this month uh very soon five days from
now they should really make a decision
that they should all take a unanimous uh
decision to withdraw their ambassadors
whoever have ambassadors that that's
pretty unlikely is it that's pretty
unlikely given past performance well
this is what what the people expect now
whether these people are going to
respond to that or not uh let's wait and
see uh malha what about in Pakistan
there's been a lot of protests there too
as we've been showing on Al jazer but
again not matched by government
action yes I think the public in
Pakistan expected a stronger response
from the government but I think the
protest demonstrations show uh that the
people sentiment in solidarity with the
Palestinians remains strong and I think
now the focus is on the meeting or the
summit meeting that has been called
where Pakistan will also be present in
Riyad of the organization of Islamic
cooperation now this is the largest
Muslim block so we have to wait and see
whether any actions emanate uh from this
conference or whether we're just going
to hear a lot of condemnations and
denunciations so this is going to be a
key key Summit uh I'm a little surprised
that it took a month for for this to be
convened but then as they say better
late than ever now these are obviously
all ways in which diplomatic pressure is
being mounted primarily on the United
States so that it begins to see uh that
its policy its dysfunctional policy in
the Middle East is going to bring much
more grief uh to the region uh as well
as to its own policies uh in the region
because I think today the United States
and many European countries uh confront
uh a crisis of credibility uh as the
Secretary General said this is a crisis
about
humanity and I think on that score we've
seen that the United States and many
European countries have come up short
they have not shown the kind of
compassion uh for the killings that are
going on uh in Gaza that they really
should have and that their own publics
also expect them to
do K B is this all this diplomatic
pressure and if it does build if if more
Nations
stise do you think it will yield
anything are we to see at least a chance
for a humanitarian pause at
least Nick if I was speaking as a
diplomat I would say probably this would
H you know um affect the situation
positively and bring about some changes
here and there but as I speak as a
student and Scholar of politics or
political science I get very very
dejected or disappointed knowing that
this is almost like a tired you know
musical record we've been here before
whereby attacks of this nature violence
of this nature erupts and the
International Community chres foul and
they try to do some ceasefire here and
there and you know with people go to Oso
and then after the the the the the
signing of the PCT or the agreement the
it is flouted and it is torn to shreds
and we are back again you here so I'm a
bit um um pessimistic about what this
will bring about however like I said in
my earlier comments this in my view will
bring to bear sub sufficient or
effective pressure diplomatic pressure
as it were on the Israeli government as
well as obviously bring about to Bear
pressure on those you know governments
or countries that might be feeling that
they want to sit on the fence or at
least to support Israel because once
there's a lot of noise that is happening
at the United Nations security Council
un security general assembly and other
International platforms when you bring
in the the European Union and all the
other countries in my view we will proba
quite likely see you know a shift but a
shift to what's the solution I am not so
sure because there are other factors to
consider once we start talking about
this more than one century you know old
conflict between Israel and
Palestine jard in your experience as a a
top level politician you've acted as
foreign secretary roaming the world and
and indeed you know the region of course
very very well how does this crisis rank
in terms of uh Global concern about how
the war is being executed and where all
this could
lead well there is uh as your other
inter other two honorable interlocutors
have said that there is a growing
concern and you have have pointed this
out uh over over the world eventually
somebody must heed that the United
States of course I agree is the key uh
is the key uh factor in this equation
and I believe that they should exercise
some power however we know that
President Biden is facing probably tough
uphill elections next November uh and at
the same time he is uh looking to the
probably the interest of the United
States that are being tied to Israel and
so in a way uh he is hesitant and he's
not taking any any action uh the
structure of his cabinet anyway and his
AIDS who come to this area probably is
very much biased and pro-israeli uh so I
really think that uh the
internal pressure within the United
States can really impact that if he is
feels that probably he could lose some
of the states key key States uh or what
we call what we might call swing States
if they if those turn against them
especially where there are Arab and
Muslim majorities Muslim solid
minorities then probably he would and
and those could tip the balance against
him in especially some Midwestern states
of the United States uh and then he
probably would not stand the chance of
winning next November election so in a
way he must be reminded and he must be
pressed upon in order to recalculate uh
his mathematical his political
mathematical political numbers and at
the same time uh take the right action
that we expect a member of the United
Nations who has been uh the primary
intermediary in the peace process to
take a more uh just and Equitable
approach to this problem especially that
we see what we see every day on
television and we have to start also
invoking the word genocide and not only
genocide but the word you know this is
in an apide State and uh uh my friend
from South Africa have gone through that
experience there is a deep sense among
many africanas that you know what
happened to them is happening to the
Palestinians and there is a deep empathy
here and so therefore nobody can
question the right of the Palestinians
to protest and to react to the
inflicting pain that is that is that
doesn't seem to stop uh whether we are
inviting or whether they are resisting
or whether they are accepting the the
mod the the facto situation which Israel
is dictating on their lives okay you've
all you've all expressed dismay at the
the failure of the UN Security Council
Malia you have written about it indeed
uh China currently has a rotating chair
of the UN Security Council H is that
going to make any difference in these
coming critical
days well I think China will push very
hard uh for the kind of resolution that
the Russians had proposed which as you
know was vetoed by the United States
which is a resolution calling for a
ceasefire now as I understand that the
E10 or the 10 elected non-permanent
members of the security Council have put
a draft together but that doesn't call
for a ceasefire not as yet it calls only
for a humanitarian pause so we are
likely to see a great deal of intense
negotiation uh in the days ahead because
there is still no agreement uh between
uh the Chinese the Arab countries and
the Russians who all want a ceasefire
and the United States and its allies
some of whom are non-permanent members
also who still are talking about a short
duration uh pause which is neither here
nor there because anything temporary is
not going to stop the fighting it's not
going to stop the Bloodshed so I think
the push for a security Council
resolution from China we will see but
whether that's enough for the United
States to relent uh on its position um
it it's hard to it's hard to tell right
now
K boha why is the United States so
Resolute in its support of Israel do you
think I think partly because the
excisable majority of the Jewish
population obviously after the Holocaust
in Germany and other places fled to the
United States and eventually ended up um
exercising significant influence in
terms of uh you know foreign policy
maybe foreign and domestic policy in the
US and to that extent I you know
attribute this to that kind of influence
however having said that we must also
know that you know states are want known
to sign diplomatic and bilateral you
know PS that will obviously ensure that
one state or one country One Nation
supports the other even when they are
facing what the other state might not
feel you know as justifiable to to find
a war that know they might think is not
winable so I agree with some of the
penals that in this regard the US also
is a very very key player uh in a sense
that um it it seems to have a better
side of the ear of Israel if one want
wants to use that that phrase but it
will also depend on whether the Israeli
regime is willing to listen because we
know in our case in the South African
situation during the aparted era when
many Western countries were supporting
apartate H we had a similar situation
whereby the powerful countries were
listening to the minority apart
government and of course you know
discounting the majority voices of the
African countries and other people in in
the African diaspora and globally So to
that extent I believe that as the phrase
has been mentioned aparate Israel it
will be very very important for the
usual the the the US and allies and
other forces of of course to look at
what Israel is doing in terms of you
know the um international human rights
law and what others call genocide to
find out whether it is actually
justifiable to go to this extent I know
Israel is talking about retaliating and
you know is taking Israel to defend
itself but also we cannot have a
humanitarian disaster happening in this
time and and era
of this Century forgetting that this
happened during the times of Hiroshima
and Nagasaki during the the Second World
War uh jard I just want to wind up the
program with you we've been talking a
lot about the the countless more than
10,000 deaths that we've seen in Gaza
but we haven't spoken of the the fear of
contagion of this uh this war spreading
throughout the region that is of course
a very important consideration isn't
it yeah I believe that yes sir I believe
that uh the longer this war stays the
more it will spread to other regions
another you cannot Escape that fact uh
International countries will be impacted
by that the world economy is going to be
impacted by that and then some superow
countries will start looking for
opportunities to see how they can
benefit from the situation uh this is
not a very nice world all the time and
War if it Contin of course it will
spread and it will involve many other
countries and the Mayhem that would
would result would probably be
uncontrollable you can start a war but
you cannot probably finish it uh so
therefore we have to uh really try to
contain the war reach a ceasefire
immediately uh all this bology about uh
you know human human Corridor uh is just
another way of saying that Kill Them
Softly uh and uh we need to have a
ceasefire where gazans can have access
to their basic needs uh and start
rebuilding their own town uh otherwise
the whole region is going to be on
fire all right with that we'll leave it
thank you to all our guest Mal ja anani
and thank thank you very much indeed and
thank you too for watching you can find
this program anytime just by visiting
our website at al.com and for further
discussion just go to our Facebook page
that's
facebook.com AJ insidestory and you can
also join the conversation on X forly
Twitter our handle is @ AJ insid story
for me Nick Clark and the whole team
here it's goodbye for
now